(Cockerel crows)
Come on. (Whistles)
I applaud your foresight.
It's as well to be prepared.
For what?
Any encounter?
With those who might...wish us ill.
Ross Poldark would not dare lay a finger on me.
- Even though we tried to get him hanged?
- We failed. Did you forget?
Ah! But on that score,
there are other ways to choke a man.
And ifthe rumours about his finances are true,
it shouldn't be difficult.
I look forward to hearing of your progress.
- (Knocking at door)
- Yes.
Beggin' 'ee pardon, Cap'n, sur.
'Tis a letter for 'ee, sur, if it please 'ee, sur.
Ah, the ole Trevorgie workings?
'Tis a fine thought, sur.
What is?
Whatever 'ee was thinkin', sur.
I'm thinking ofthrashing you from here to Sawle.
Aye, sur. Well, whatever 'ee say, sur,
much obliged, sur...
I write to remind you that your loan of £1 ,000
with interest at 40%
is shortly due for repayment.
Yourfriend, Harris Pascoe.
All I need.
What is?
Jud.
His grovelling is killing me.
Are you away somewhere?
To Truro.
For the Wheal Leisure shareholders' meeting.
Oh, just since the trial, I've scarce seen you,
let alone had time to speak.
You always seem about
some business or other.
The mine? The harvest?
Would you have me neglect our affairs?
- No, Ross.
- We'll talk soon. I promise.
Gentlemen, welcome to the quarterly meeting
ofthe Wheal Leisure shareholders.
Now before we begin, I must make you aware
that Mrs Jacqueline Tregidden
has sold her shares to a Mr Coke.
Since Mrs Tregidden has always trusted us
to do our business without her interference,
let's hope this gentleman will do the same.
- (Clears throat)
- (Knocking)
Good day t'you, gentlemen.
My name is Tankard.
Acting on behalf of Mr Coke.
Mr Warleggan, more like.
Pray go on with the business, sir.
I'm most eager to hear what you have to say.
Oh, shield your eyes, my boy!
The dazzle ofWarleggan livery can blind a man!
George has invited us to a soirée.
I've sent our regrets.
No, no. No. No, surely not?
Pray convey our delight
in declining his invitation.
Now then, boy,
would you like to do your lessons...
- ..or help me in the fields?
- The fields!
The fields is the correct answer!
Gentlemen, it's been four years
since we opened Wheal Leisure.
We started with 50 men, now we employ 100.
We're not prosperous,
but we consistently show a small profit.
We're not getting fat on it.
But that could change if another lode of copper
could be found. Mr Henshawe?
(Clears throat)
'Tis er...common knowledge
that the ancient Trevorgie workings,
abandoned half a century ago
when the owner died
were never worked out.
The old shafts caved in long ago.
'Tis impossible to reach from above grass.
But if you look at this old map,
and compare it with the current map
ofWheal Leisure workings
you'll see that we've extended considerably
in the direction of Trevorgie.
My proposal is this: we divert our quarterly
profits into starting an exploratory tunnel
to see ifwe can join up the old Trevorgie
workings and access the untapped copper.
And who's to do the digging?
Will it take men away
from the day-to-day workings?
Can you guarantee that copper will be found?
How will this affect my client's dividends?
As you know, sir,
there are no guarantees in mining.
Mr Henshawe
will personally supervise the venture.
A small team, including myself,
will be led by Zacky Martin.
And we take on six extra men to cover them.
Well, I can't see the harm of it.
I doubt their wages'll bankrupt us!
Ye can be sure ofthat!
I'm in favour.
Who's with me?
Motion carried.
Mr Aukitt and Mr Tankard declined.
(Galloping horse approaching)
Captain McNeil!
Mistress Poldark! Have you recovered
from your husband's ordeal?
I give thanks daily for his acquittal, sir.
Doubtless he's a wiser man for it?
No more sailing close to the wind?
- You know Ross.
- Mm.
- Is he home?
- In town.
I'm in the neighbourhood
at the behest of Unwin Trevaunance,
advising on matters of local security.
But I trust I may drop in and take a glass of rum
with my old army comrade?
Or indeed my old comrade's wife.
- Allow me, ma'am.
- Oh.
Thank you.
George Warleggan
finally has a spy in the camp.
It was bound to happen eventually.
But provided the other shareholders hold firm,
Tankard and George can be kept in check.
It's the last thing 'ee need now,
with all the rumours goin' about.
- Rumours?
- The parlous state o' your finances?
Have people nothing better to gossip about?
You'll have to excuse me, gentlemen.
I'll see you tonight at the mine.
When's the last time 'ee took a day off?
When I sat in jail, awaiting trial.
Cap'n Ross be 'ome soon, I bla'.
I hope so, seeing as Captain McNeil
has called 'specially to see him.
Hmm!
Your health, ma'am.
In truth, 'twas also you I wished to see.
On account of your skill at cow doctoring.
I've no such thing, sir.
Sir Hugh Bodrugan has heard different.
His prize cow Sheba is sick.
He'd esteem it the greatest offavours
if you'd cast your eye over the beast
and prescribe a remedy.
He asked for you particularly.
- I don't doubt it.
- May I tell him that he need not hope in vain?
Captain McNeil?
An ambush, sir!
Caught off guard and in possession ofthe field!
How are you, sir?
On manoeuvres hereabouts?
Quartered with Sir Hugh at Werry House.
Whither I'm attempting to lure your wife.
To what end?
Sir Hugh wants me to tend to his cow,
though I say I've no skill.
Can I persuade you
to lend your wife to such a cause?
Demelza has a mind of her own, sir,
but since she has a special fondness
for Sir Hugh, no doubt she'll be over directly.
Ifyou'll excuse me,
I have mine figures to attend to.
Look, Horace, what beastly little hovels.
Who could bear to live here?
I urge you to quit this place
and come to London,
then loathsome sights need not distress you.
I did not say I found
all the sights loathsome hereabouts.
Well done, my boy.
He's not been right
since he returned from Bodmin.
He is changed.
And I do not know how or why.
But we must be glad of it.
Elizabeth Poldark "regrets".
This is Francis's doing.
Why er...waste your time on these people?
Surely Unwin is of more use?
Unwin is proving less of an asset than I'd hoped.
All manner of promises
made in exchange for votes
and I'm beginning to fear they're wasted.
What's the use of having an MP in your pocket
if he's too obtuse to do your bidding?
He is pliable.
Is that not an asset?
Only if yoked to wit and intelligence,
which in this case it is not.
How was the meeting?
- Illuminating.
- Tell me.
But first, summon Tom Harry. There's another
small matter regarding Poldark's manservant.
When 'Is Worshipfulness the judge
he says to me, "Mester Paynter", he sez...
"Did this man do wrong or no?"
And I sez, "Sithee Your Honourableness,
Ross Poldark is as innocent
as a newly-dropped babe in its first wettels."
And sez 'Is Majestic Horribleness...
"Mester Paynter, 'tis your testimony...
..an' your testormy alone 'ave set this man free."
Did you mislay your manners?
Leavin' me alone to deal with our guest?
You appeared to be handling him admirably.
- I felt like an intruder.
- Meaning what?
Demelza, do you really suppose
he wants you to cure Bodrugan's cow?
He makes his intentions very plain.
I think I ought to be able to judge that for myself.
No doubt you think so,
just be careful his uniform doesn't dazzle you.
- It has that effect on some people.
- Especially a common miner's daughter?
That's for you to demonstrate.
You are detestable sayin' that.
- I'm sure I didn't start this argument.
- No, but you never do!
You just give me the cold shoulder
and sour looks
an' despise everything that isn't
up to your high-an'-mighty standards!
(Barking)
- What 'ee bin sayin' t'upset the maid?
- I haven't the faintest idea.
Demelza?
Are you well?
Quite well, thank 'ee.
I came in search of Garrick.
He scented a rabbit an'...
Garrick! Garrick, come to!
Is Ross recovered from the trial?
He rarely speaks of it.
And your news? The child?
Is he pleased?
Not exactly.
You've not told him.
He don't wish for another.
Since Julia, he...
..he haven't the heart for it.
And we're to blame.
'Tis not my b'lief.
It's good of you to say so.
But the fact that there's still discord
between our families.
There is. An' I think 'twill not be lightly set aside.
By Ross at least.
Garrick!
When we strike,
it must be clean and swift and out of sight.
Giss on, man, you're talkin' to the master now.
Gentlemen. A good night's work?
A good deal nearer Trevorgie
than this time yesterday.
- Go home and get some rest.
- None ofthat for the wicked!
It's home to breakfast then away to Truro.
My finances require urgent attention.
(Door opens and closes)
- Demelza?
- Ross.
(Sighs) You first.
No, you.
I want to apologise.
I've been distracted of late.
But there are things
I've been wishing to say to you.
- And I you.
- About our finances.
Oh.
My shares in Wheal Leisure
are the only thing of value we have.
I've begun work in this new tunnel to try
and improve our chances ofthe mine
becoming more profitable,
but still, our own coffers are almost bare.
It doesn't need to be like that.
You're head purser at the mine.
Why won't you take a wage?
I prefer to plough every last penny into the mine.
We have, however, a more pressing concern.
Last year I asked Pascoe
to find me a loan of£1 ,000.
The interest at 40% is due this week.
£400?
Yes.
How is half such a sum to be found?
What's to be done?
Ride to Truro, see if Pascoe's managed
to get the loan extended for another year?
In the meantime, the more I work in the mine,
the better our chances of reaching Trevorgie.
And the interest?
Look about you.
See what you can bear to part with.
Then look again.
Ah, Mistress Demelza.
- Have you come to steal my heart?
- (Laughs)
- No, sir. I've come to visit your cow.
- Oh.
It wasn't easy but I've secured agreement
for your loan to be extended for another year.
At the same exorbitant rate.
Provided...this year's interest
is forthcoming tomorrow.
A mere £400.
Quite so.
She d'look fair sick, Sir Hugh.
What treatment has she had?
Well, all manner of blisters, clysters,
salves and poultices. All to no avail.
But I've no doubt you'll offer better advice.
I will.
Start afresh with a better beast.
- How went the shareholders' meeting?
- Well enough.
- But for the appearance of a new shareholder.
- Tankard? The Warleggan proxy?
You heard.
Are they on a mission to own the company?
No, sir.
Just to own me.
This cow you speak of, your Emma...
Oh, she's our pride an' joy, sir.
So we could not let her go
except at a goodly price.
Oh, well, not ifthe rumours be true.
Your husband's financial difficulties?
Of course I...I'm always happy to help a friend.
And I could be persuaded
to pay the "goodly price"...
..ifthe terms were right.
And what terms would you require?
Oh, merely a...a kind of interest.
Payable here and here.
- And here!
- Sir Hugh! You forget yourself!
- On the contrary.
- Judas, I think my dog has better manners!
- Woof! Woof!
- Sir Hugh.
I believe you're wanted at the house.
Urgently.
Hmm. (Chuckles)
Sir Hugh's a mite unruly sometimes.
Should you decide to brave his company again,
I will personally undertake to protect you
from his enthusiasm.
I'm much obliged, sir.
I'm not overjoyed to think of Sir Hugh
in possession of Emma.
No, nor I, but you said she must be sold
and I've secured a buyer.
So what else must go?
Well, not the oxen.
Without them we cannot plough.
But the pigs, the chickens.
- The clock.
- The carpet.
The settle.
At least one chair.
My brooch is worth £100.
That was a gift.
But it may need to be sold in the end.
I wonder what Garrick
could fetch on the open market?
One overgrown mongrel? Carnivorous.
- Crockery breaker.
- And stealer of pies.
D'you suppose there'd be any takers?
(Rumble ofthunder)
(Chickens clucking)
May I fetch you anything from market, Uncle?
You're going in with Unwin, are you?
Good Lord, no.
I'm in need of some sensible conversation.
Well, then, Hicks must escort you.
Caroline, you cannot be roaming
about the countryside unaccompanied.
No, Uncle.
But if I were to go, what could I bring you?
Sugared almonds? Marzipan?
You spoil your old uncle.
(Both chuckle)
(Market traders call out)
(Chatter)
Dr Enys!
What a lucky encounter.
How are you, Miss Penvenen?
I have a tingling in my throat.
Do you think it could be serious?
I very much doubt it.
You seem otherwise in the peak of health.
I hope it's not morbus strangulatorius?
If it were the putrid throat, you'd soon know it.
Is that what Ross Poldark's daughter had?
He's not exactly blessed with luck, is he?
No. And that doesn't seem about to change.
How humiliating it must be for him.
- Less for her, I suppose.
- I doubt either ofthem see it that way.
Would you excuse me, ma'am?
I have patients to see to.
(Soundtrack over dialogue)
Mistress Poldark.
Ross.
How are you?
You don't look at all well.
Can it be the anxieties ofthe trial?
Nor you, George.
- Could you have had some disappointment?
- None that I know of.
Perhaps it is yet to come.
Ross.
How did you manage it?
It was quite straightforward.
We sold pretty much everything we own.
You see, a real horse is much better
than a hobby horse, is it not?
Why does Uncle George not visit us any more?
Uncle George is not our friend.
Is Uncle Ross our friend?
In time...
in time I hope he will be.
You're quite the favourite with Mrs Tabb
these days. She cannot abide Dr Choake.
I suspect she prefers
the cheapness of my remedies.
Or possibly their efficacy?
Aunt Agatha,
Dr Enys has agreed to take tea with us.
You know how she loves to hear
ofthe latest dread diseases.
Is it my imagination
or is Francis in better spirits these days?
Scrofula. That's it.
Great purple blotches
and swellings ofthe neck.
Since the trial, you would not know him.
I cannot tell if it's because Ross was saved
or if something happened
while he was in Bodmin.
He shared your room...the night before the trial.
Did you notice any strangeness
in mood or behaviour?
Not that I can recall.
Something he said, I had the feeling...
You may think me callous or hysterical,
but I could almost believe that Francis
had intended to kill himself.
Did he?
Whatever occurred, be glad of it.
He came to town a broken man.
He returned...
like that.
(Rustling)
Mr Paynter!
Who, sur? Me, sur?
Nay, not I, sur.
You will recall the bargain
we struck some time ago?
Bargain?
I never struck no such thing.
I don't hold with 'em, does I?
In exchange for testifying against Ross Poldark.
Nay, p'raps I do recall something.
Thinkin' it over, I wasn't meself in court.
Mebbe it slipped my mind.
In which case 'tis on'y fair
to give 'ee back yer guineas.
- Ten, were it?
- 15.
But that is not what we have come for.
For what, then?
This.
Argh!
(Jud groans)
(Beating continues)
You see much of Ross and Demelza?
Why do you ask?
I so wish our families could be reconciled,
but Ross is determined to keep his distance.
I wonder...might I ask you to speak to them
on our behalf?
What could I say?
Francis is to give a supper when the harvest
is in to our tenants and friends.
Would you ask Ross and Demelza to join us?
To stay the night? You, too, are most welcome.
I'll happily carry the invitation.
I cannot guarantee how it will be received.
DEMELZA: Sorry, it's not much.
Mmm.
Ross...
I've been wantin' to speak of somethin',
but haven't yet found the right moment.
- Surgeon's 'ere.
- Oh!
- Dwight.
- Hope 'ee's eaten afore!
Admiring our harvest?
I hope to augment it.
With an invitation.
Oh?
From Trenwith.
Obviously we won't accept.
Surely we can't forget
that it's thanks to them that we lost Julia?
Or that George is still their bosom friend?
- Is he?
- You'd have us overlook it?
Have I said that? No, in truth,
I'm in no haste to go to Trenwith.
Then we're in accord.
It do appear so.
(Prudie shrieks)
He'm dead!
He'm dead. He'm mortal dead!
Who could have done such a thing?
He 'ad no enemies.
He were the sweetest, kindliest,
most peaceable cove a body could meet.
An' ne'r a cross word did pass 'is lips.
An' now I left a widow, all forlorn,
without a penny in the world...
..not e'en to bury the poor soul, God rest it!
There is this.
When we moved 'im, they fell out of his pockets.
Gold sov'reigns? Gold sov'reigns?
- Where'd 'ee get such...?
- Where indeed?
Why, the mizzerly, mazzerly stinkin', black worm!
He had 'em about 'im an' never tell'd me?
- Reckon 'tis from the Trade?
- That's unlikely.
I'll knock 'im sideways
down Stippy-Stappy Lane!
Then give 'im a rare good buryin'.
Rum an' vittles...
..hymns an' viols,
widow's weeds for poor ole Prudie.
'Tis a matter of lookin' respectable, 'tis.
We must send the ole man offfitty ways.
ROSS: I've known him since I was a child.
He was the most useless servant under the sun.
But he taught me to smoke a pipe...
..and cheat at Loo.
They left the money.
Yes?
Then it was no random attack.
What, then?
Vengeance?
- What for?
- You were in court.
You heard his original statement.
He was ready to testify against me.
But then he did not.
What if he was paid to speak against me -
hence the 15 guineas,
and then changed his mind?
ROSS: George has played us all.
Would George wreck all that we have?
The family, the business, and now our servant?
That seems to be his aim.
DEMELZA: Can we do nothing?
ROSS: It suits George
to have myself and Francis at odds.
Perhaps we should accept
the invitation to Trenwith.
DEMELZA: Are you sure, Ross?
Some things cannot be mended.
But some can.
(Cries out)
(Elizabeth laughs)
This is your doing?
You're not displeased?
Far from it.
Cousin.
It's an unexpected pleasure.
Thank you for bringing him.
It means the world to Francis.
You look well, cousin.
- Demelza.
- Francis.
Welcome.
I 'ave 'n! I 'ave 'n!
- I 'ave 'n!
ALL: What 'ave 'ee?
What 'ave 'ee? What 'ave 'ee?
A neck! A neck!
- A neck!
ALL: Hurrah!
Hurrah! Hurrah!
Elizabeth.
I was expecting a small, private gathering.
Instead I find myself ambushed by san-culottes.
Hardly, Mama.
These are our tenants and friends.
Trust me, a few crusts will not curry favour
when they turn on you.
Ask the Marquis de Launay,
ifyou can find his head.
You look radiant, mater-in-law.
- Are you quite well, Francis?
- Never better.
Come, then, friends!
Shall we have some dancing?
Yes, I think we shall.
(Jaunty tune)
I ordered you to scare him,
not assassinate him.
- Tom got a little carried away.
- This is disastrous.
- You think Poldark will know who's behind it?
- I wouldn't be surprised if he's outside now!
(Knocking)
How d'you like my new coat? I ordered my tailor
to make it the double of Prinny's!
You most definitely need one, George.
Well, can we go to the Penvenen party?
My intended will be impatient to see me.
By all means.
RAY PENVENEN: Caroline? (Knocks)
Come in.
Caroline, my dear? Are you ready yet?
Our guests will be arriving soon.
I have such a pain.
But Tom Choake was here just now.
Did he not bleed you?
Would you have me submit to his butchery?
So what do you propose?
FRANCIS: This is the last bottle ofthe '83.
After that, we'll have to resort to cheap gin.
Did you hear I quarrelled with George?
No.
What was the cause?
Oh, these things tend to sink in slowly.
At first you barely notice,
and then one day you wake up to the realisation
that the man who has been
your friend for years...
..is a complete and utter blackguard.
Well, I don't disagree. Indeed, I strongly believe
he's behind the assault on Jud.
- What will you do?
- Till I can prove it...
nothing.
But when I do...
- A letter for you, Doctor.
- Thank you.
Someone taken ill at Killewarren.
Tell them to be ill at a more convenient time.
It's a complaint ofthe throat.
I must go.
Elizabeth, where's my port?
Lady Whitworth says that fashions in London
and Bath are now verging on the indecent.
What exactly does that mean?
Bosoms.
Acres of 'em -
exposed like capons on a platter!
You look pale, child.
- Are you unwell?
- No.
No, that is, I believe
I may be sickenin' for something.
Get Elizabeth to mix you a rouge.
Elizabeth goes out so seldom,
she has no need of it.
It's criminal that this should be the highlight
of your social calendar, Elizabeth.
I know I would be driven quite mad
had I only farmhands and kitchen maids
to converse with.
If you'll beg my pardon,
I must take a breath of air.
(String quartet plays)
Damn it, I'm partial to a harvest supper.
Gladdens the heart
to enjoy the fruits of one's own labours!
Remind me when you were last in your fields
with a scythe, sir?
Is Miss Penvenen not here?
Nor her uncle. Most irregular.
Invited to supper and not a sign ofthe hosts.
Shall we hunt them down?
Ah, McNeil, what news?
Can we rest easy in our beds,
knowing you've purged the district of violence?
I lay claim to no such thing, sir.
Only last night
we had a murder on our doorstep.
- Surely not?
- Captain Poldark's manservant.
Paul Daniel? Where 'ee be?
Do 'ee go draw the spigot
on the next keg o' brandy.
I've an urge to address the conflagration!
Jud Paynter... 'ee were a whited sepulchre.
But now 'ee's passed on
to flowery fields and green meads.
When Paul Daniel come back,
we'll raise a toast an' send 'im on his way.
- 'Ee's gone.
- We know that, fool!
From his slab! 'Tis empty!
The corpse ain't there!
(Screams)
(Woman approaching wailing)
- What is it? What is it?
- 'Tis they body-stealers!
They've robbed me o' my ole man!
Oh.
(Laughter and chatter)
Ah.
My niece has been ill for three days.
Dr Choake attended her, of course,
but she grows worse
and she insisted on sending for you.
Did Dr Choake attempt a diagnosis?
Quinsy.
- With or without fever?
- Without.
- But she can hardly swallow.
- Is it the putrid throat?
That we will shortly ascertain.
Will you open your mouth? Please?
Might a servant fetch me
some warm water and salt?
I'll see it done directly.
I think I might be able to help you,
but you must keep absolutely still.
Can you do that?
- Adams or Wyatt?
- For what?
Our house in London.
Caroline will want the latest thing.
She can well afford it.
I wonder whether it shouldn't be Wyatt?
His Pantheon in Oxford Street
has pleasing dimensions.
Perhaps you'd better secure the lady
before you start spending her fortune.
Mr Aukitt.
Excuse me.
Remind me,
do you still have shares in Wheal Leisure?
Yes, I do.
May I tell you a secret?
Old Fred Pendarves.
He's a mine captain
at Grambler in my father's day.
For a month now
I've had him prospecting over my land.
To what end?
Ross, you know I'll never make a farmer.
It's mining.
Mining. It's what I keep coming back to.
That's what he wanted for me.
God knows he'd be as surprised as me to think
that any ofwhat he taught me had sunk in.
But...that's the truth of it.
We must start mining again.
Don't let me deter you,
but even a hole in the ground costs money.
I have money. A few hundred put by.
Ifthings had gone badly at the trial,
I would have given it to Demelza.
Now I'm...
I'm minded to spend it
on a final attempt to secure my own destiny.
If only to spite George.
I think the best revenge is to succeed
in your own right, despite his interventions.
Almost there.
- (Gasps)
- All done.
Now rinse your mouth with salt water.
It'll get easier now.
What did you do?
When did you last eat fish, Miss Penvenen?
Three days ago.
You must be more careful in future.
A fish bone.
Can I do anything for Horace while I'm here?
WOMAN: Whoops!
- Mr Aukitt?
- Can you help?
- What ails him?
- A fatal gaming encounter.
I doubt you can save him. (Laughs)
- The ladies have deserted us.
- Yes.
ROSS: Perhaps we bore them.
- Perhaps.
I think I must go to bed.
I find I'm less able to hold my liquor these days.
No, no, stay, finish your drink.
Thank you, cousin.
For what?
I never thought to see you under my roof again.
I never thought to be here.
(Wails)
(Sobs)
'Tis the shame of it!
To 'ave an husband, an' to not 'ave an husband.
I'll never live it down.
Ssh now.
Then there's the buryin'.
'Ee can't 'ave a buryin' without a body.
No.
So not only am I' robbed of a husband,
I'm robbed o' the pleasure
of seein' 'im planted in the ground!
(Gasps of shock)
(Gasps)
- Miss Penvenen, I trust you are on the mend?
- I believe I am, sir.
Ah.
Have I missed all the fun?
You appear to have had some of your own.
Oh. It must be the ride and the night air.
- Was it the putrid throat?
- Thankfully not.
I did have to sedate William Aukitt though.
He was so agitated he could barely speak.
What ailed him?
A fit ofthe Warleggans?
He'd been talking to George,
and before he knew it,
he'd signed away some shares
in a mining venture.
He did not specify Wheal Leisure.
Did George look happy?
Yes.
So 'ee was lyin' on the table...
And I wakes up in me winding sheet
wi' a terrible thirst, dreamin' o' gin.
So off I carts to Jake's kiddley for some ale,
an' what 'appens?
Ther's all up an' screaming like stuck pigs,
and fallin' o'er each other to get out the door.
So in I goes, drink me fill...
..an' when I come 'ome to Prudie...
An' what do I find?
All fligged out in fancy widow's weeds.
An' folk-feastin' an' drinkin', at my expense.
An' nought left
but a jug o' brandy an' a windin' sheet!
Tidn' fit, tidn' right, tidn' fair, tidn' proper!
Truly I say unto thee,
a prophet is never honoured in 'is own land.
Oh! Ross.
I thought everyone had retired.
I thought so, too.
Is Demelza about?
I think she was feeling unwell and went up early.
I thought I'd clear up.
Let me help you.
I must thank you for coming.
It was a good day.
Heaven knows how we've paid for it.
But Francis was insistent.
The Poldarks have fallen low.
You must be sorry you married into the family.
Do you think I should answer that?
Perhaps I should not have asked it?
Francis tells me he has some money put by.
I'm surprised
he doesn't use it for this household.
Oh, no, he's quite adamant.
It's a "special sum"
to be used for a "special purpose".
- Does George know he has it?
- George gave it to him.
Did he?
In recompense for his gaming losses
to Matthew Sanson.
- D'you believe that?
- Should I not?
George is not known for his philanthropy.
But Francis is changed.
Yes.
And you, I think.
For the better?
I wouldn't go that far.
I remember a time you were already perfect.
To me, I mean.
ELIZABETH: That was long ago.
And you've been more than happy since.
With Demelza.
And you've grown up.
Not too much, I hope.
Today in the fields...
you looked like a girl of 16.
Your age when I first knew you.
These past months have changed me...
..has made me appreciate
what I have rather than what I lack.
ROSS: It's very wise.
After all, there's no point thinking about
what might have been.
But you and I
would never have been happy together.
Our characters are too different.
True.
But cannot love overcome such obstacles?
And surely there's a greater impediment.
You're a lady.
You could never have played the scullery maid.
- Perhaps I have hidden talents.
- I don't dispute that.
For somehow you've managed
to bring the light back to Francis's eyes.
I cannot imagine how.
Can you not?
You should go to bed, Ross.
Demelza will be thinking you've gone astray.
Good night, then.
You're awake?
I thought you'd retired long ago.
I went out.
Out?
Prudie came.
Jud's alive.
What?
At least until Prudie do kill 'im again.
Jud's alive?
What happened? How?
Oh, ask me tomorrow. I'm weary to the bone.
Are you sure?
I did see him with my own eyes.
Elizabeth looked well tonight.
She did.
Her mother thinks
that were she not wed to Francis,
she'd have halfthe aristocracy at her feet.
But she is wed to Francis.
And she seems content to be so.
Do you remember our last visit here?
That Christmas?
When you first told me you loved me.
And you told me you were with child.
'Twas different then.
You were glad I was with child.
We were in our first days of love.
And you would never have
looked twice at another woman.
Oh, Demelza...
What man does not
occasionally look at another woman?
Or woman occasionally look at another man?
And what man or woman of sense
does not have qualms
about bringing a child into the world?
Demelza?
Yes, Ross?
Yes, Ross.
An' I know that you don't want it.
An' I know its just another burden to you.
But there's no preventing it now,
so all we can do is...
How long have you known?
Since the trial.
Good God.
- And not to tell me?
- You said you didn't want another after Julia.
Nor did I. Nor do I.
The very thought of it, a child to grow
into our hearts and then be lost to us again?
Could you bear it?
I could not.
But if a child is coming...
..that's different.
A child is not a thought.
It is flesh and blood.
And if you can risk your heart again...
I can.
Then so can I.